[Core] StateHash Interfaces & Diagrams (#252)
pokt-network/pocket: shared/docs/flows/AppHash.md

> # AppHash

Reviewer: https://github.com/pokt-network/pocket/pull/252#issuecomment-1268495211

# AppHash <!-- omit in toc -->

- [Context Initialization](#context-initialization)
- [Block Application](#block-application)
- [Block Commit](#block-commit)

> <!-- See if there's an answer in this question to add links to notes: https://stackoverflow.com/questions/74103729/adding-hyperlinks-to-notes-in-mermaid-sequence-diagrams -->

Reviewer: 👍

Author: @deblasis Do you think this needs any other changes?

# AppHash <!-- omit in toc -->

- [Context Initialization](#context-initialization)
- [Block Application](#block-application)
- [Block Commit](#block-commit)

## Context Initialization

This flow shows the process of context initialization between all the modules requirer to apply a block and compute a state hash during the consensus lifecycle.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    %% autonumber
    participant N as Node
    participant C as Consensus
    participant U as Utility
    participant P as Persistence
    participant P2P as P2P

    N-->>C: HandleMessage(anypb.Any)
    critical NewRound Message
        C->>+U: NewContext(height)
        U->>P: NewRWContext(height)
        P->>U: PersistenceRWContext
        U->>U: store context<br>locally
        U->>-C: UtilityContext
        C->>C: store context<br>locally

>         Note over C, P: See 'Block Application'

Author: Resolving in the meantime, but here's the question: https://stackoverflow.com/questions/74103729/adding-hyperlinks-to-notes-in-mermaid-sequence-diagrams

    end

    Note over N, P2P: Hotstuff lifecycle
    N-->>C: HandleMessage(anypb.Any)

    critical Decide Message
        Note over C, P: See 'Block Commit'
    end
```

## Block Application

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

This flow shows how the `leader` and the `replica`s behave in order to apply a `block` and return a `stateHash`.
```

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant C as Consensus
    participant U as Utility
    participant P as Persistence

    alt as leader
        C->>+U: GetProposalTransactions(proposer, maxTxBz, [lastVal])

>         U->>U: reap mempool

Reviewer: From this diagram it looks like if the `leader` reaps the mempool **every time**.

But as far as I understand, it has to only if there is no quorum for the `Prepare` otherwise it has to use the block in the QC.

I understand it would be quite challenging to represent the two scenarios but maybe it could be another  `alt`

Author: What if I have a `Note` with the text `Get / Prepare Block` and in a separate diagram, we can show the difference?

Author: Resolving per the discussion below.

        U->>-C: txs

>         Note over C, U: fallthrough to replica behaviour

Reviewer 2: This note seems to imply the "leader" portion is an "opt", not an "alt".

Author: Resolving per the discussion below.

>     alt as leader
>         C->>+U: GetProposalTransactions(proposer, maxTxBz, [lastVal])
>         U->>U: reap mempool
>         U->>-C: txs
>         Note over C, U: fallthrough to replica behaviour
>     else as replica
>         C->>+U: ApplyBlock(height, proposer, txs, lastVals)
>         loop for each operation in tx
>             U->>P: Get*/Set*
>             P->>U: result, err_code
>             U->>U: validation<br>logic
>             U->>P: StoreTransaction(tx)
>             P->>P: store tx<br>locally
>             P->>U: result, err_code
>         end
>         U->>+P: UpdateAppHash()
>         Note over P: Update State Hash
>         P->>-U: stateHash
>         U->>-C: stateHash
>     end

Reviewer 2: There are a few observations to the diagram, and a suggestion to accompany them.

Given [the conversation above](https://github.com/pokt-network/pocket/pull/252/files#r990511395):
* it seems the activity around getting the proposal transactions is optional (when acting as leader) and does not exclude the rest of the sequence. I put the conditional section in an `opt` block instead of an `alt` block.
* I reflected my understanding of @deblasis' comment with regards to the `reap mempool` message by making it mutually exclusive with `get QC`. I don't know where the QC comes from, but reflected my guess that utility might have it.

Other changes: 
* The loop label might have been meant to be `tx in txs` instead of `operations in tx`.
* When actors message themselves into doing work, they should be activated
* Responses should be dotted lines.

```suggestion
    opt if leader
        C->>U: GetProposalTransactions(proposer, maxTxBz, [lastVal])
        activate U
        alt no quorum for Prepare
        U->>U: reap mempool
        activate U
        deactivate U
        else
        U->>U: get QC
        activate U
        deactivate U
        end
        U-->>C: txs
        deactivate U
    end
    C->>+U: ApplyBlock(height, proposer, txs, lastVals)
    loop for each tx in txs
        U->>+P: Get*/Set*
        P-->>-U: result, err_code
        U->>U: Validation logic
        activate U
        deactivate U
        U->>+P: StoreTransaction(tx)
        P->>P: Store tx locally
        activate P
        deactivate P
        P-->>-U: result, err_code
    end
    U->>+P: UpdateAppHash()
    P->>P: Update state hash
    activate P
    deactivate P
    P-->>-U: stateHash
    U-->>-C: stateHash
```

Reviewer 2: [Here's a link](https://mermaid-js.github.io/mermaid-live-editor/edit#pako:eNqdVMtu2zAQ_JUFT04jI3cdDDQq0BxVOOqlKoqFtLaIUiRDrgK7Qf69S8mvRkZQRAdC2MfM7HClF9W4llSuIj0NZBv6onEbsK8tyOMxsG60R8tQAEYonI1k4xDn-SrlK9ZG836eLVO2pBB15ERT26nGeQa9AUPYUphC6SmWq1WVw1fiMjjvIprHgDZiw1oULPwYpJBBj7vH3f2fDH4YjPwdzc-bM0oqf0YmqC5ihsE6eBpcGHrYuABlIFFK55JqIg-EHnrqvXPmfcyWrkXJxDnolhi-FR-Cs-0lmsAVOfAuvtd36kl-3gr9Z-_N_t645veiI73tOIOzlwKWwcHGeLDROOdHlwS7kwrQ9l_SNNdtOV7Vp7u1HOdUmUQuRyfjYISKQviV1m3mihDqFtPdCuFWNx_x5yhkzS7QxbYseHdzqWm1OhalccQKNGZ_hbC8Slj-93gn74_CKi8jktzAA8ZucdB00DPlIHI6O8lP2be0cyEnEWPrw6lzXJBlMYurTPUUetStfPMvKVYr7qinWuXy2tIGZZZa1fZVSnFgt97bRuUcBsrUMMo8_CJUvpE9ode_LdtK7Q) to a rendered version of this suggestion

Reviewer: Nice one, the "replica" behaviour (and the fallback to replica from the leader) looks clearer as well IMHO

Reviewer 3: Good feedback @iajrz gives me more confidence moving forward with sequence diagrams in general. Also valuable edits IMO

Reviewer 4: Nicely done! @andrewnguyen22 do you still want @oten91 eyes on this before we close it out?

Reviewer 3: I wouldn't say it's required for my approval. I am awaiting Olshansk's changes / response to Irving's however

Reviewer 3: It's important to note - `StoreTransaction()` isn't called until after the `Commit()` phase along side `StoreBlock()`. Please adjust accordingly

Author: @iajrz The suggestion is 💯 !
